7.
Ethical Foundations in Dentistry
Autonomy
This principle emphasizes the importance of respecting patients' rights to make informed decisions about their dental care.
Dentists must educate patients on their treatment options, including risks and
benefits, allowing them to choose according to their values and preferences.
Beneficence
This principle emphasizes the duty of dental professionals to prioritize their patients' best interests.
It involves offering effective treatment that enhances patient health and well-being.
Dentists must stay informed about current practices and advancements in order to maintain high care standards.
Non-Maleficence
This principle, meaning "do no harm," requires dental practitioners to avoid causing harm or suffering to patients.
It involves being aware of potential complications and ensuring all procedures are necessary and performed carefully.
Justice
This principle emphasizes fairness in dental care, ensuring all patients receive equitable treatment, regardless of background or socioeconomic status.
Dentists should work to eliminate biases and provide access to quality services for everyone.
Confidentiality
Protecting patient information is essential for maintaining trust between patients and dentists.
Dental professionals must safeguard personal health information and only share it with authorized individuals.
Informed consent is necessary before disclosing any patient information.
These ethical foundations guide dental practitioners in fostering trust, ensuring patient safety, and providing high-quality care in their practice.